<article>
<titre>THE FUTURE OF A MARGINALISED CONTINENT 
Can Africa really unify ?</titre> 
<auteur>Mwayila Tshiyembe
* Director of the Institut panafricain de géopolitique, University of Nancy II, France 
See The African Union.</auteur>
<texte>
The Organisation of African Unity finally established the African Union in 2001, and, although there had been vociferous demands for union ever since the OAU was founded in 1963, there was in fact complete indifference to the actual setting up of the union. This month the union will hold its own first summit, in South Africa. Will it prove to be the answer to globalisation, as its advocates once hoped ?
The Pan-African dream originated in America at the beginning of the last century. The aim was to revive African culture, restore the dignity of black men and women and advocate their return to the land of their fathers, the source of the diaspora. Henry Sylvester Williams, born in Trinidad, was one of the first emblematic figures of the movement. He sought the company of natives of Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Gambia and the British West Indies, steeped himself in the realities of African life, and in 1900 organised the first Pan-African Conference in London, its principal resolution being concerned with the confiscation of land in South Africa by the British and Afrikaners, and the fate of the Gold Coast (Ghana).  
Then, in 1919, William Edward Burghardt DuBois, founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP), organised the first Pan-African Congress in Paris, which called for the adoption of a "code of law for the international protection of the natives of Africa", the right to land, education and the abolition of forced labour. At the 4th Congress, held in New York in 1927, he opposed Marcus Garvey, leader of the Back-to-Africa Movement and advocate of black Zionism. Garvey had founded a shipping company, the Black Star Line, and mobilised over 3m Afro-Americans but his dream was to be engulfed in financial scandals.  
In 1945, at the 5th Congress in Manchester, George Padmore from Trinidad introduced a manifesto which proudly proclaimed : "We are determined to be free ... Colonial and subject peoples of the world, unite !" Under his auspices, the torch of militant Pan-Africanism was handed on to the new generation, the future leaders of independent Africa, Jomo Kenyatta (Kenya), Peter Abrahams (South Africa), Haile Selassie (Ethiopia), Nnamdi Azikiwe (Nigeria), Julius Nyerere (Tanzania), Kenneth Kaunda (Zambia) and Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana).  
After the 6th and 7th Congresses in Kumasi (1953) and Accra (1958), the issues of decolonisation and East-West confrontation were to dominate the political and diplomatic agenda and produce two forms of Pan-Africanism. The first, the maximalist approach, sought to redraw the geopolitical boundaries set by the Berlin Conference (1884-1885), which had sanctioned the division of the continent into European spheres of influence. The ultimate aim was now to establish a United States of Africa that would give the continent a role in world affairs. Political, economic and military unity was the main key to meeting this challenge, according to Ghana's leader, Nkrumah, and in January 1961 the Casablanca Group comprising Ghana, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Ethiopia, Libya, Sudan, Guinea, Mali and the provisional government of the Algerian Republic (GPRA) rallied behind his war cry, "Africa must unite" (1).  
This brave venture was open to attack in two respects that Presidents Nkrumah of Ghana and Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt had underestimated or overlooked. First, there was the sheer weight of the former colonial powers. Although weakened by the second world war, subject to the new US-Soviet order and forced by the United Nations to pursue a policy of decolonisation, they still had considerable powers to influence events and wreak damage. Every plan for African unification was in direct conflict with their vital interests (mineral and energy resources, powers of patronage and trading networks).  
In addition Nkrumah and the Casablanca Group had naively hoped for support from the progressive camp, headed by the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, and from the United States as champions of individual freedom and self-determination. Unfortunately the progressives' backing was largely confined to words and the US supported the combined colonial powers in pursuing a policy of containment designed primarily to stop the spread of communism.  
The second form of Pan-Africanism was the minimalist approach embodied in the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). Its strategy is based on the principle that every state has an inalienable right to independence. Its watchwords are "the inviolability of borders inherited from colonialism", respect for sovereignty, and non-interference in the internal affairs of states. This strategy was embodied in the Monrovia Group, established in May 1961 and dominated by the father figures of Presidents Felix Houphouët-Boigny of Côte d'Ivoire and Leopold Sedar Senghor of Senegal.  
Cementing the schism
The OAU, founded in 1963 at Addis Ababa, set the seal on this schism. This explains why the OAU has by and large failed to achieve the objectives, set out in Article II of its charter. These were to promote the solidarity of the African states and coordinate their policies, blocked by the failure of the Lagos Plan (1980) and the African Economic Community (1991) ; and to defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of the member states, undone by the inability to settle the conflicts in Liberia, Somalia, Sierra Leone, Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  
In addition the failure of most member states to pay their contributions (arrears amounted to $50m in 2001) deprived the OAU of its prime source of funding and reduced it to begging for assistance, all to no avail. But it has provided a forum and as such it has inspired the international community to end colonialism and support liberation movements, through the United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement.  
The African Union, with a range of new institutions, was established in July 2001 to replace the OAU in order to address these problems. The new Union, which has its first summit this month in South Africa, will have to fulfil certain conditions if it is to promote the socio-economic development of Africa and to face more effectively the challenges posed by globalisation, the objective set by the sixth recital in the preamble to the Constitutive Act of the Union.  
The ratification of the act has gone through without a hitch. But that is just the beginning since, notwithstanding the objectives and organs listed in the Act, the true nature of the African Union remains something of a mystery. So, 38 years after the OAU came into being, the rift between maximalists and minimalists has survived both the ideological crisis generated by East/West rivalries and the leadership crisis arising from the "fathers of the nation" syndrome. It is therefore imperative to clarify the nature of the political and economic union, to avoid falling into the trap of an OAU mark 2.  
The act provides for a number of institutions, many of them inspired by the European Union : an Assembly of the Union, a Commission, a Pan-African parliament, a Court of Justice, machinery for the settlement of conflicts, and an Economic, Social and Cultural Council. In view of the enormous problems involved, it was decided at the Lusaka summit not to set them up immediately (2). The powers vested in the new organs under the Act will have to be defined, since it is absolutely essential to adopt a strategy of institutional innovation, to give Africa the power to act (see box).  
A credible strategy for the prevention and settlement of conflicts, more extensive than the machinery introduced by the OAU in 1993, is also required to give full effect to the right conferred by the Constitutive Act of the African Union "to intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances, namely : war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity" or to respond to "the right of Member States to request intervention from the Union in order to restore peace and security".  
In the light of the potential threats, the Union will have to work out a strategy for the deployment of peacekeeping forces : each national army, or national army of a leading state in each sub-region, will make available to the sub-regional conflict prevention and management authority a contingent of men trained and equipped for peacekeeping and peacemaking operations, together with the means to support a limited sub-regional staff (3). This machinery will have to be linked to an African general staff under the direct control of the Assembly, the aim being to minimise the costs of force projection. The question of coordination with the present sub-regional machinery will have to be settled and the French Reinforcement of African peacekeeping capacities (Recamp), the US African Centre for Security Studies (ACSS), and the British Military Advisory and Training Team (BMATT) will have to be integrated into this overall strategy.  
And lastly, political union without economic union is a delusion. Financial institutions such as the African Central Bank, the African Monetary Fund and the African Investment Bank, planned under the Constitutive Act of the Union, can function only if they cover a common economic area. If the whole process of institutional renewal really is carried through, the African Union will provide a framework for integrated regional development such as the founding fathers of Pan-Africanism scarcely dared to dream of. 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) Kwame Nkrumah, Africa must unite, 1963. 
(2) Speech by Colonel Muamar Gadafy at the Lusaka summit, July 2001. 
(3) Mwayila Tshiyembe, "Les principaux determinants de la conflictualité africaine", in La prevention des conflits en Afrique, Karthala, Paris, 2001.
</notes>
</article>