<article>
<titre>AMERICAN BURBS 
Malls aren't us</titre>
<auteur>Tom Frank
* Author of The Conquest of Cool (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1997) and One Market Under God : Extreme Capitalism, Market Populism and the end of Economic Democracy (Doubleday, New York, 2000).</auteur>
<texte>
US-style shopping malls are taking over the world. Marketing maestros mean to win consumers by selling them packaged authenticity and commodified distinction. But Americans are tiring of the suburban way of life and the assault of concrete, car and hard sell.
In the beginning was the Country Club Plaza, constructed in Kansas City in the 1920s along with a vast fiefdom of surrounding residential neighbourhoods. The Plaza was the world's first fully planned, automobile-based suburban shopping centre. It was the focus of a suburban fantasyland where houses come in flavours like French provincial, Scottish baronial, and tidewater Virginia, and the shopping centre itself is a perfect replica of Seville, in Spain.  
But it all seemed normal to me. I never considered how odd it was for a residential neighbourhood to leave out sidewalks, or to scatter old bits of European stuff (columns, statues, sundials, etc) along its streets, or to call itself the Country Club District. Every year we welcomed the traditional beginning of the Christmas shopping season by flocking down to the Plaza to watch as its world-famous holiday lights were switched on ; we approved as the Plaza's more plebeian tenants (grocery stores, bowling alleys) disappeared in a (successful) effort to upgrade the area's class identity ; and we marvelled as the Plaza's planners dammed and rerouted and contained and disinfected a nearby creek into a Plaza-worthy pleasure pond.  
It was a secession from the hardbitten life of Kansas City proper, of course. But with its good schools, swimming pools, private police forces and nearly all-white upper-class neighbourhoods where property values never decline, the Country Club worked. It worked so well that the Plaza is today a destination for tourists from all across the Midwest. Now you can eat hamburgers with them in a gritty teen hangout, which is a family-friendly replica of the old 1940s teen hangout  ; you can hear people there make self-deprecating remarks about their unfamiliarity with the ways of the big city ; you can see them ride around the department stores and parking lots of the Plaza - the world's first car-oriented shopping centre - in horse-drawn carriages.  
What began at the Plaza continues now a hundred blocks to the south and west, as the Kansas City suburbs stretch themselves over mile after mile of former farmland, building gigantic shopping malls, mirrored office buildings, "upper-bracket" neighbourhoods and six-lane arterial roads on the farthest periphery of the urban area. The far-off hills sprout McMansions and the busy intersections that didn't exist a year ago are now tricked out with brokerage offices and funky franchise restaurants and luxury grocery stores.  
The Oak Park shopping mall is the Kansas City metropolitan area's largest, with 1.4 million square feet of retail space. I passed a single vacant lot of unmowed prairie grass, brown from the intense heat. For a second I wanted to investigate this indiscretion, to find out how this one plot of familiar Kansas scenery came to be overlooked by the developers, to wander out there and never come back. Instead, I immersed myself in the powerfully air-conditioned Nordstrom department store, a place where hearty masculine greeters welcomed me to the fraternity of guys who wear Polo cologne and select expensive sunglasses in wood panelled rooms while the manly sounds of alt-rock crooning fill the air.  
Stuffing your own teddy bear
Wandering deeper into Oak Park mall, I got more intimate with the international corporations that rule this suburban realm. I found the Warner Bros Studio Store, a friendly retail face for that grandest of the culture mega-conglomerates, AOL Time Warner. The purpose of the store seemed less to sell products than to give consumers ways to interact with the company's brand : Instead of offering, say, running shoes at different prices, made by a number of different manufacturers, this store offered every imaginable sort of article - watches, keychains, T-shirts - emblazoned with Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and the rest of the loveable AOL Time Warner cartoon gang.  
Our own place in this corporate cosmos was hinted at just down the mall at the Build-a-Bear Workshop, where a hyper-cheerful greeter stationed at the shop's door invited me to express my individuality by constructing a teddy bear. I could choose from several different models, stuffing options and recorded sounds, she informed me, striving for maximum adorability. In the final proof that individualism is something that rolls off an assembly line, I was invited to register this cute expression of my free choice in the great electronic teddy bear census.  
There is nothing unique or local about what is going on at the Kansas City periphery. In the late 1950s the enclosed mall was invented by a developer in Minneapolis, mainly for the sake of efficiency and shopper comfort during the brutal northern winters. Over the next 40 years this architectural form blossomed in vast numbers from New York to Los Angeles, with few variations on its basic themes : huge, box-like structures surrounded by parking lots large enough to accommodate the maximum expected number of shoppers ; two or more "anchor" stores (usually one of the big national department stores) at the outermost ends of the structure, with the intervening space filled by boutique retailers ; a food court in which shoppers can choose from any number of fast-food restaurants ; an almost total lack of ornament on the structure's exterior with all the architectural design and innovation being reserved for the air-conditioned inside.  
The Plaza was the inspired work of a single promethean developer ; the modern shopping mall, on the other hand, is possibly the most studied and professionally refined landscape in the world. Building and managing malls is an enormous industry, and enthusiastic shopping is as vital to American prosperity as cheap oil. That is why retailers and ad agencies employ anthropologists to study us while we shop (1) Soundtracks are carefully chosen to soothe us or hurry us along. Window displays and in-store posters are carefully tested. From the lighting to the potted plants to the tenant mix, nothing here is left to chance. Nothing is the way it is because someone just thought it looked good.  
Malls and the surrounding sprawl are a physical reflection of sophisticated, predatory, modern capitalism. Strangely, though, much of the recent American literature of suburbia insists on casting the mall-based order as a transparent expression of the popular will. Giant malls with giant parking lots and endlessly wandering suburban subdevelopments are the way they are because we, the people, want them that way. You may not like shopping malls, but they are the creation of the market, the market is all about choice, and so malls are what happens when you allow the people to travel and choose freely. Malls are us.  
This argument quickly descends into a familiar market populism in which the landscape of capitalism is equated with the virtuous common man, while any critique of suburban sprawl is dismissed as self-righteous elitism. The debate over sprawl thus becomes a class struggle in which a gang of egotistical high-hat leftists, in love with planning and convinced that they know what's best, face off against the real people, who choose the mall. So natural has this ideological reflex become that one controversial mall designer refers to himself as "the people's architect."  
Flight to the cities
But it is not quite true. When people are actually asked about sprawl - as opposed to having their opinions defined as identical to the deeds of the corporate developers - it quickly becomes obvious how much they hate it. Few people believe anymore that the solution to urban woes is to drive a little further, set up a new mall, slap together a shitty house, and spend all day driving back and forth amongst the tiny trees in their four-wheel-drives. Young people of means are flocking back to the cities deserted by their parents, filling up the zoned "bohemian" neighbourhoods and sending urban real estate prices soaring. And among those who stay in suburbia nobody wants some new subdevelopment going up down the way and making the traffic in their existing subdevelopment that much worse.  
This new anti-suburban mood is obvious even if you haven't heard about the anti-sprawl movement. The longing to escape is, of course, the soul of the suburban impulse, and these days it expresses itself vividly at any shopping mall in the country. Consumers are jaded and cynical with the suburban way, the industry press insists. They don't want to visit yet another faceless mall. They want experiences, not just stores and restaurants. They want to feel like they're somewhere other than amongst the look-alike cul-de-sacs and prefab manses of the burbs.  
It takes an hour and a half to drive from the South Side of Chicago to the Woodfield mall in suburban Schaumburg, Illinois. Constructed in the early 1970s, Woodfield was until 10 years ago the largest mall in the world (today it ranks third), with some five anchor stores and 2m square feet of retail space. What goes on here, in store after store and restaurant after restaurant, is the selling of packaged authenticity and commodified rebellion against the suburban way of life. You may live in an indistinguishable stretch of tract housing and type away for hours in a cubicle like everyone else, but with the help of the chain stores in this (or any) mall, you can imagine yourself a rule-smashing iconoclast, a hardened urban individualist, a person of distinguished tastes, a lone wolf in a crowd of timid herd creatures. To the outside world the word Schaumburg is shorthand for all that is conformist and soulless and fake about suburbia. But Schaumburg itself thrives by dealing in the cultural antidotes to conformity, soullessness and fakeness.  
The first thing you notice is that almost everyone in the Woodfield mall has an attitude. Fred, the salesman who helped me in the Marshall Field department store, wears his head shaved with a tiny ponytail in back. A mannequin display in that same store is emblazoned with the bold declaration : "I Am What I Am." The teenagers wandering about appear uniformly in sideburns, piercings, and tattoos ; I even saw a tattoo peeking out from the shoulder of an adult shopper in line before me in the upscale Lord and Taylor department store. Even Lane Bryant, a boutique for overweight women, is pushing a "Revolution in Denim" along with teeshirts that declare, simply, "Rebel."  
This retail insurgency wouldn't make sense without frequent reminders of the bland, debased, pre-hip culture we're rebelling against. This is why several shops in the Woodfield mall go out of their way to offer vivid images of the fatuity of earlier suburbanites. A store called Lucky Brand moves units by mimicking the innocent-looking advertising art of 50 years ago and dressing what appear to be antique mannequins - with big, gullible smiles on their faces - in the hippest of denim wear. The Fossil shop, retailer of lord knows what, is decorated with numerous send-ups of old-style logos and posters in which clueless airline stewardesses wave happily and blithe men in fedoras smile broadly. But for us it's alternative, authentic, extreme. Down in the Vans shop, one of two skateboard-oriented stores I came across, teenagers skate back and forth on an actual plywood half-pipe. Only a few years ago, skating was thought to be an incorrigibly adversarial pursuit ; today it's in the mall like everything else.  
Every single restaurant is themed, and every theme is billed as a daring break from the usual. The rest of the suburban world may eat bland store-bought white bread, but with the help of Au Bon Pain you can put that conformist world behind you and even imagine you're still in the good old urban neighbourhood, what with all its crusty, European-style breadstuffs. At the Rainforest Café you can pretend to dine in the pristine Amazon jungle. The cuisines of China, Japan, Italy and California are all available. Microbrews everywhere provide a soulful alternative to flavourless Budweiser. (Not content to be identified as the default bland beer of suburbia, Budweiser is firing back these days with an authenticity push of its own, adopting as its new slogan the one-word declaration, "True.") At the Vie de France I enjoyed a little fake Parisian atmosphere, sipping vinegary Merlot at a pavement table while watching the carefully coiffed teenagers flow nervously by under the bright chrome light fixtures.  
For the owners of other shopping centres, market forces have made the last decade a time of disappointment and decline. With management's power over labour greater than it had been in many decades, Americans found they had less and less time to spend wandering the air-conditioned byways of the local shopping mall. They wanted things cheap and they wanted them now. In response, the country witnessed an explosion of Big Box stores and Category Killer retailers - massive, warehouse-style establishments where overhead has been cut to the bone by the elimination of decoration and delicate display cases. Here products are sold in bulk under raw industrial lighting and naked steel rafters. Great mounds of Clorox, Tide, and Colgate stretched nearly all the way to the 30-foot-high ceiling, stripped of their brand magic and piled up like any other commodity.  
Usually one finds Big Box stores on the outskirts of town, where land is cheap. But in Kansas City, Costco Wholesale store is in midtown, on the site of a neighbourhood of apartments and nightclubs. Here there once stood a legendary bar called Milton's, the last surviving piece of the Count Basie/Charlie Parker jazz scene of the 1930s. Its owners had clung to their programme of cheap drinks, dim lighting, a great record collection, unchanged (and unironic) 1940s décor, and live jazz nightly all the way up into the early 1990s. But Milton's, located right on the street, seemed to stand in the way of everything that was safe and desirable according to then-current development standards. It had to make way for progress. Today it's a Costco parking lot. 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) See Franck Mazoyer, "The science behind shopping", Le Monde diplomatique English edition, December 2000. 
</notes>
</article>