<article>
<titre>ISRAEL VERSUS PALESTINE VERSUS THE WORLD
The Middle East : how the war cannot be won  </titre>
<auteur>Paul-Marie de La Gorce
* Journalist and author, in particular of De Gaulle, Perrin, Paris, 2000. </auteur>
<texte>
The international community cannot protect Israeli or Palestinian civilians, neither side's fighters will back off, nobody knows how to begin the peace process again - must all of this lead inexorably to another formal conflict  ?
The intifada and Israeli reprisals have so far paralysed every attempt to achieve a genuine ceasefire. There can no longer be any doubt in Palestine of the determination of some to continue the trial of strength for as long as it takes, to force Israel to resume political negotiations. Equally apparent is the anguish of others set upon preventing the downfall of the Palestinian Authority (PA) and the loss of what has been obtained since the Oslo accords.  
One of the top leaders of Hamas states his case clearly : "There is no longer any question of stopping fighting, now the complete deadlock affecting the 'peace process' has shown that we must once more resort to armed struggle. Victory cannot be achieved in Palestine alone. Our aim is to produce a sufficiently powerful shock in the whole of the Arab and Muslim world to mobilise it in our favour." Objections that no Middle East state seems inclined to involve itself, even indirectly, in the conflict with Israel prompt an immediate response. Hamas is convinced that public opinion will force governments to set aside their indifference or else it will find its own means to act, helping the Palestinian resistance or threatening Israel directly.. Some might counter that the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), in the late 1960s and early 1970s, counted on the 'revolutions' that would occur at its call or following its example, and that these hopes proved vain. Hamas' standard reply to this objection reflects Islamist political and social thinking, of which it is merely the Palestinian version, affirming that revolutions cannot mobilise the Arab and Muslim world, only religion.  
Fatah leaders naturally defend a different line. We talked to Marwan Bargouthi, one of the main leaders of the current intifada, Muhammad Dahlan and Jibril Rajoub, respectively heads of security for Gaza and the West Bank. They maintain that after almost a year of intifada, led by Fatah but with other Palestinian organisations playing a part, there is no question of accepting that hundreds of Palestinians have been killed and thousands injured for nothing. There can be no ceasefire without clear, verifiable political compensation. Nor is it possible to accept the preventive arrest of several hundred Hamas and Islamic Jihad cadres and militants, even if Fatah formally rejects their methods. If in the past these heads of security ordered similar preventive arrests, it was because there was some hope of building a viable Palestinian state. Now there is no other perspective but all-out conflict with the Israeli forces.  
Yasser Arafat's team - in particular the people in charge of negotiations from the Oslo accords to the Taba talks this January (see article by Alain Gresh) - believes that everything possible must be done to preserve the achievements of recent years. Its priority is to maintain the physical existence of the PA, in the midst of Palestinian territory. Though it is not called a government, the PA has established itself in the eyes of the international community as the only genuine representative of Palestinian interests. It has thrown off the constraints of exile and still enjoys popular support.  
This was what decided Arafat and his advisors to continue discussions with their opposite numbers in the United States and Israel. On 15 June 2001 these talks seemed on the verge of yielding a series of sequences, reaching from a verified ceasefire to cooling-off, then confidence-building measures. In October political conversations would have resumed, leading theoretically to an agreement next June at the latest. The whole plan collapsed as violence escalated again.  
Turn for the worse 
The turn for the worse could have been sudden and extreme. The Israeli army high command had planned a large-scale operation. Its aim was to neutralise and destroy the PA. Gaza City would have retained partial autonomy, as would a few West Bank localities, for which the Israeli government, despite numerous previous setbacks, thought it could find new, more amenable representatives on the spot. To accommodate US objections, the Israeli government opted for a step-by-step approach to destroying the political and military organisation of Palestinian resistance, by attacking specific targets almost every day. However, whether the Israeli government sticks to this policy or reverts to a more radical approach, there are already risks of the war spreading.  
The US is worried about this eventuality and is keen to prevent any further outbursts of violence that might upset the political, strategic and economic order that has prevailed in the area since the Gulf war and suits its interests so well. The overall objective has not changed but the Bush administration must take account of its predecessor's ultimate failure to obtain an Israeli-Syrian settlement and reach agreement in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. No one in this administration disputes the fact that the US must address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, simply because of the dramatic consequences of it spreading to the rest of the Middle East.  
Several of the high-ranking US officials concerned make no attempt to conceal their irritation at the behaviour of the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon. His daily offensive to demonise the PA and Arafat himself is at odds with what US diplomacy is trying to achieve. When he first met Arafat in the middle of June, the director of the CIA, George Tenet, started by assuring him that the US still considered him the only valid representative of the Palestinian cause. Similarly, State Department officials in Washington, taking their cue from secretary of state Colin Powell vigorously condemned continuing construction of new settlements in the Palestinian territories and spectacular incursions by Israeli forces into autonomous zones.  
Considerable pressure was exerted to have the operation to neutralise and liquidate the PA postponed. But it cannot be assumed that the US is prepared to use all its available resources to change Israeli policy. Much as his predecessors, George W Bush must make allowance for many other factors in his handling of the Middle East crisis, if only because of his low score in the presidential election or the current attitude of Congress.  
The Iraqi dilemma 
The intensification of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis has undoubtedly already compromised US foreign policy. This is clearly the case for Iraq. The Bush administration had planned a complete rethink of the sanctions system. It wanted a more flexible attitude to imports, in exchange for stricter control of Iraqi foreign trade. This was to be achieved by maintaining checks on financial transactions and directly supervising commercial exchanges at Iraq's borders.  
US diplomacy seemed to be on the verge of achieving its aims. At the UN Security Council, France had agreed to support the plan. As a result, it forfeited its previous position as a privileged trading partner with Iraq. China also agreed, determined to conclude the interminable negotiations on joining the World Trade Organisation. But Russia vetoed the initiative, mainly because of the outright refusal by Iraq's neighbours to take part in the US plan. Neither Syria nor even the Gulf states could take the risk of being accused of lending themselves to US policy, with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict reaching new heights.  
The US administration now has to cope with an endless stream of apologies and recriminations from Arab states that were once its most amenable allies. Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah, next in line to the throne, has postponed his visit to Washington, for example. The conservative Arab regimes have always based their legitimacy on religious tradition and must consequently give overriding priority to the fate of Jerusalem.  
This ties in with one of the problems taking up much of the Bush administration's time and energy. To a far greater extent than is generally realised in Europe, the US is worried about Arab and Muslim terrorism and actions against US interests. It has issued warnings to US citizens living or travelling in the Middle East and has temporarily closed its embassy in Yemen. Washington is increasingly concerned about having to cope with a probable increase in terrorist acts specifically targeting its interests. Any sudden deterioration in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would, it is feared, fuel this threat.  
Regional responses 
None of the Middle East governments want to be drawn into war, but how are they to avoid it ? Senior government officials in Damascus are still mulling over the reasons for the failure of the Geneva meeting between presidents Clinton and Hafez al-Assad on 26 March 2000. The Syrian foreign minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, keeps recalling the 12 phone calls, that Clinton made to Assad, one after another, to convince him they should meet. Yet this supposedly decisive encounter had not been properly prepared. Sharaa cannot understand what prompted Clinton to endorse an Israeli proposal to give Israel a strip of land along the shore of the Sea of Galilee. This plan flew in the face of repeated statements by Syria that negotiations would never make any progress without recognition of what had been agreed at previous talks. Syria was particularly keen that Israel should uphold prime minister Yitzhak Rabin's commitment to withdraw from all of the land occupied since June 1967.  
Syria is now convinced that there is no reason to hope for a settlement in the foreseeable future. Sharon's statement, during a visit to the Golan Heights on 10 July, confirmed this view. He claimed he would make Israel's hold on the land "irreversible". He added : "Increasing the Jewish population and bringing in new residents would alone be capable of transforming settlement in the Golan into an irreversible reality". He even went so far as to describe settlement of the Golan as "one of the most beautiful achievements and successes in the history of Zionism" (1).  
The shift in new Syrian president Bashar al-Assad's policy on Lebanon must be seen in this context. When his late father gave him responsibility for Lebanon he sought to achieve a direct agreement with its president, Emile Lahoud. He was counting on Lahoud using his full authority, drawing on the Maronite community to which he belongs, as well as the contacts he has kept since he was commander of the armed forces ; he was also counting on Syria's own influence over the other communities. But these plans were foiled when a coalition of all the traditional Lebanese political forces won the last general elections.  
The new prime minister, Rafiq Hariri, was convinced that though Syria might be persuaded to relinquish direct control over Lebanon's domestic affairs, there was no question of seeking a confrontation. The Syrian vice-president, Abdel Halim Khaddam, once more in charge of Lebanon, prepared an agreement redefining the relations between the two states and substantially reducing Syria's military presence on Lebanese territory.  
At the same time Assad seized the opportunity of an Arab summit in Amman to establish good personal relations with Arafat. He was nevertheless careful not to link their policies, for it remains as important as it was when his father was in power to avoid exposing Syria to the many, unpredictable repercussions of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  
Assad has also maintained, and even extended, arrangements to facilitate all forms of exchange with Iraq via the frontier between the two countries. This includes carefully restricted use of the pipeline across Syria that enables part of Iraqi oil exports to reach their destination. Syria has also blocked US plans to set up a new system of sanctions for Iraq. On the other hand, it has avoided any political involvement with Iraq and any direct support for Saddam Hussein.  
Saddam Hussein has long given up hope of obtaining a complete end to the blockade imposed by the US and its allies. His objective is to get round the sanctions, substantially reducing their sting. This will not put an end to the suffering inflicted on the Iraqi people but it should avoid constant, physical controls on Iraqi territory by the international community - in other words the US.  
To achieve this, Saddam has successfully played on the interests of neighbouring countries. By encouraging trade with Iraq, Jordan, for instance, is thought to have gained $600m, Syria more than $800m and Turkey $1bn. Turkey remains concerned about the Kurdish areas in northern Iraq and wants to be at liberty to destroy PKK (Kurdistan Workers' Party) rear bases, but without compromising its existing, largely economic relations with Iraq. Lastly, Iran has no intention of playing ball with the US, despite still being on appalling terms with Iraq.  
Egypt seems to be at a loss as to how to cope with the new climate in the Middle East. President Mubarak has always led the way in the search for a peace agreement, making every possible use of his personal links with Arafat. But his efforts have come to nothing. At home, the meagre results of economic development and the disintegration of all the mainstream political forces have played into the hands of the Islamist opposition. Only a spectacular success abroad - the conclusion of a peace agreement between Israel and Palestine - could have countered this unhappy trend. The Egyptian press, yielding to the irritability that seems to be affecting the government, is increasingly inclined to indulge in anti-Semitic campaigns, which reflect above all Egypt's inability to act. On 18 July even Mubarak confessed his confusion : "With Sharon there is no solution. He is a man who knows only murder, strikes and war" (2). 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) AFP, 11 July 2001. 
(2) AFP, 18 July 2001.
</notes>
</article>