<article>
<titre>THE VALE OF SORROWS 
Kashmir : partition's bitter legacy</titre>
<auteur>Roland-Pierre Paringaux
* Journalist 
Also read :  A 'disputed' territory   Ordinary villagers </auteur>
<texte>
India claims to be the victim of Pakistan and its unofficial Kashmir allies in Islamic movements close to the Taliban a complaint that long predates the attack on the New Delhi parliament in December. Over half a century of dispute over divided Kashmir has again come dangerously close to outright war between the now-nuclear powers.
Srinagar, capital of the north Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, is a besieged city. The tone is set when you arrive at the airport, with its tight security. The Indian army and security forces are always present (1). In the city and around it, military and police are everywhere, in bunkers and lookout posts, in tanks and armoured cars, behind barbed wire, behind shields, in bullet-proof vests. Saigon and Beirut were not like this, even at their worst. In the city centre workers are repairing a wall of the State Assembly building demolished in October by a suicide squad in an attack that left 40 dead and 80 wounded.  
Forces are deployed in the many villages of the central Vale of Kashmir, and along the line of control, the old ceasefire line that crosses the country from east to west. This mountainous region sees clashes between the Indian and Pakistani armed forces. Local people are caught in the crossfire between armed bands and military and police, sometimes brutal in their response. The place is wracked by poverty and despair. Beside Lake Dal, between Srinagar and the Himalayan foothills, the owners of the carved wooden houseboats and floating hotels lament lost tourist income. During the 1990s visitors to Kashmir fell from 800,000 to a few thousand a year. Now, many boats have been left to rot and soldiers have replaced tourists in the spectacular, frozen scenery.  
India has always sought to blame the situation entirely on Pakistan. The Islamabad leadership never accepted that Jammu and Kashmir became part of the Indian Union in 1947 and has always backed Kashmir's secessionist forces ; retaking Kashmir is a sacred cause. In May 1999 the Pakistani army planned and organised the invasion of Kargil on the Indian side of the ceasefire line (2). But India is far from blameless, especially considering how New Delhi has treated Kashmir and its people their identity, their rights and legitimate aspirations.  
A history of military and diplomatic confrontation (see box) has created a cycle of distrust and incomprehension. From the start, the government suspected the Muslim majority of pro-Pakistani secessionist sympathies. Mehbora Mufti, a member of parliament and chair of a pro-Indian Kashmiri party, explains that the Indian leadership has always distrusted Kashmir's Muslim population, rejecting all criticism and any political initiative. So the United Nations plan for a plebiscite in 1948 was sidelined. Local people were never consulted, let alone involved in political life. For a long time Delhi ignored the resentment.  
Former Indian foreign minister Jyotindra Nath Dixit summarised the situation in a recent book : "There was reluctance from our own political leadership and establishment to face the fact that the disturbances in Kashmir were not entirely due to Pakistani activities but also due to the alienation of some parts of the Jammu and Kashmir population. While everybody paid lip service to the need for restoring the political process and acknowledged that the critical situation in Jammu and Kashmir could not be resolved by coercive force alone, no structured policy could be evolved to revive this process" (3).  
For decades the fate of the Kashmiri Muslims, divided between India and Pakistan, was not considered important. They were Sufis, known for their moderation, and they suffered in silence. Before the 1987 elections there was hope of Indian-style democratic change. A coalition of parties (pro-Indian, pro-Pakistani, pro-greater autonomy or independence), under the banner of the Muslim United Front, seemed likely to win against the official National Conference formation.  
But fearing the break-up of India, the authorities reacted brutally. They rigged the vote to ensure a National Conference victory and arrested several Muslim Front leaders. India then used the election results to prove that the Kashmiris wanted to remain with India and to rule out the idea of a referendum under UN auspices. In so doing, they permanently alienated millions of Kashmiri Muslims, who felt despised and deceived, facing a worsening political future. Anti-Indian feelings grew, and the angry young began to revolt.  
'Violence breeds violence'
Pakistan quickly took advantage of the situation. "For 40 years we sought to use democratic and peaceful means," Abdul Gani Bhat recalls. He is chairman of the All Party Hurriet Conference (APHC), a coalition of separatist and pro-Pakistani secessionist movements. "India replied with violence. But violence breeds violence and hatred breeds hatred ; the inevitable happened." In 1989 Islamabad backed Kashmiris advocating armed struggle and offered them a rear base.  
"We were forced to fight, not for religious reasons or because we like violence, but to get the people's voices heard and our aspirations respected. To make India stop acting like an army of occupation and practise here the democracy it practises at home," explains Javed Mir, one of the first to confront the Indian military, weapons in hand. He is a former student leader and is now vice-chairman of a separatist party, the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF). He says that "like many of the Muslim opposition", he took up arms after he was arrested and imprisoned several times for his political activities.  
But the Kashmiris' frustration was not the only cause of armed struggle. Publisher Tahir Mohiudin points out that "1989 was the year the Soviets were defeated in Afghanistan. In the euphoria, some thought it would be possible to repeat what the mujahedin had done in Afghanistan against India in Kashmir" by diverting demobilised Islamist fighters and the aid they had received through Pakistan to a new war in Kashmir.  
So 1989 marked the start of a guerrilla war in which those known here as the "militants", mainly young Muslims from the Vale, crossed the mountains and the line of control to training camps in Pakistani Kashmir, Pakistan and sometimes Afghanistan. There, they received basic military training and religious instruction. Pakistan provided the logistics and paid the bill. After one or two months, the new fighters returned to the Vale. In groups of five or ten, they took advantage of their mobility to strike and vanish.  
For around five years Kashmiri "militants" did most of the fighting proof of wide support in a population where almost every family has lost a father, a son, a brother, a friend. The rest of the world may have ignored this war, but it has cost tens of thousands of lives, and every conversation here resonates with pain. Some believe this bloodshed is the reason for the increase in the numbers of foreign combatants since 1993, mainly Pakistanis, also Afghans and Sudanese. Others point out that since 1993, and even more after 1996 when the Taliban seized power in Afghanistan, radical Pakistani religious leaders like Maulana Masood began calling openly for "the liberation of Kashmir, which is part of our plan for the destruction of India". Until recently, they were recruiting volunteers and collecting funds openly for this new jihad.  
This changed the balance of power within the armed struggle. According to Inspector General Rajinder Singh of the Border Security Forces, between 40-50% of the 2,000 or so combatants are now foreign mercenaries. Over tea in a Srinagar bunker, he told me that the largest armed group in the Vale is still the 1,000-strong Hizbul Mujaheddin, 85% of whom are Kashmiris. Most of the remaining 1,000 are divided between four Pakistani groups : the Laksar-e-Taiaba, which over the past year has been responsible for suicide attacks, the Jaish-e-Mohammed, thought to have close links with Osama Bin Laden's al-Qaida organisation, the Harakat-ul Ansar and Al Badar.  
Graveyards of martyrs
Ranged against them, the Indian army and security forces may have more than 200,000 men on the ground. Over the years the war has become more murderous, claiming 25,000-40,000 lives in the Vale. Every day newspapers carry casualty reports : civilians too are targeted or caught in the crossfire. In Srinagar, Baramula, Kupwara, Sopore and many other villages, graveyards are full of young "martyrs". Emergency laws like the Public Safety Act (PSA), adopted against subversion, do not help. Non-violent parties and organisations complain that they are made to pay for any opposition. There are frequent arrests and disappearances. Prisoners of war are rare. "The military don't normally bother with prisoners," says Manzoor Ganai, a barrister at the Kashmir high court. Some paramilitary units have a bad reputation. The Special Operations Group and the National Rifles are regularly accused of murder, rape, racketeering and other violations of human rights.  
Last year, 12 years after the conflict began, there was renewed violence . In November official statistics showed 4,000 incidents compared with 2,500 the year before. More than 3,000 died (1,600 "militants", 1,000 civilians and 500 Indian soldiers) and there was a steep increase in the number of wounded, 4,000 of them, mostly civilians.  
Appeals are regularly made for an end to violence, for the armed struggle to be replaced by a democratic process. Some people in Srinagar no longer believe in democracy, or no longer want to. They can see nothing that would restore even the minimum of confidence that it would require, and nothing has been done to defuse the tension. The reverse is true. "No serious attempt has been made in recent years to bridge the gap between India and the local people ; that's the tragedy of Kashmir," says Yusuf Jamil, a respected journalist. "The refusal to distinguish between armed groups, treating them all as terrorists, is a refusal to see reality, a denial of any possibility of negotiation. India's only response tot he real questions has been repression. Delhi has wasted its stock of sympathy. Now it's too late."  
Many Kashmiris agree. Others want to believe there is still a chance. They say India could benefit from favourable circumstances this year the weariness of Kashmiris, new elections, the positive effects of the Afghan crisis to get things moving. For Mehboba Mufti the position is clear : "If the Indian government wants to stop the slaughter, it must restore confidence urgently. And start by holding fair elections. Without that, nothing will be possible."  
With election approaching in Kashmir, Indian prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee promised last August that voting would be "free and fair". But the record is bleak. After the 1987 fraud, the separatist and secessionist parties boycotted the 1996 and 1999 elections. The main opposition group, the APHC, says it will no longer take part in Indian elections. Like Pakistan, it now wants a referendum under UN auspices and talks with India, including Kashmiris. Can the Indians afford to risk truly free elections when the Kashmiris are clearly against them ? The Kashmir Times said that "Despite a two-thirds electoral majority, the National Conference (the ruling party) is still remote from the masses."  
India could also take advantage of events in Afghanistan to make progress on Kashmir. The international drive against terrorism, General Musharraf's pro-American policy and the destruction of the Taliban regime have been a serious blow to Islamic groups operating in Kashmir and have strengthened India on domestic and international fronts. Indira Gandhi in 1972 was able to wring concessions from Ali Bhutto, weakened by the loss of East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) ; India's leaders are now in a similar position of strength with the Pakistani military. But it is uncertain whether they will want to move, at least not until they have proof and a guarantee that Pakistan's leaders have decided to dismantle their networks against Indian Kashmir : "to put an end to terror and jihad," as a high-ranking Indian official put it. The chances of that seem remote.  
India is also reluctant to reopen this Pandora's box because it does not want outsiders involved. That has always been its policy. But after Afghanistan, the international community may now try to defuse the Kashmir situation by getting the two adversaries, both nuclear powers, round the negotiating table. Shabir Dar, general secretary of the Muslim Conference of Kashmir, believes that "the potential threat from the Kashmir conflict is considerable, not only for our region but for the world. The international community must do something." India, though, is determined that no one will force its hand. "We are not a small country that can be pushed into concessions or compromises against its will," a senior foreign ministry official stressed.  
This great power language pleases those who want a military solution. There is no shortage of them and sometimes the conflict gives rise to nationalistic posturing. Indian defence minister George Fernandes, home affairs minister Lal Krishna Advani, and Jammu and Kashmir's prime minister Farooq Abdullah recently called for the right to pursue the "militants" to their refuges in Pakistan. Other hawks dream openly of a "good war" with Pakistan, and all of them have their supporters (and voters) in the Hindu community and among those who stand to gain from a war, both civilians and military. As a Kashmiri journalist said, "The maintenance of the military, and the deaths of 500 soldiers a year, isn't a high cost for a nation of a billion." 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) Part of India, the State of Jammu and Kashmir is made up of three entities : Kashmir, often called the Valley, in the centre, Jammu in the south and Ladakh in the east. The population is estimated at eight million, 61% Muslim, mainly in Kashmir, 30% Hindu in Jammu and 6% Buddhist in Ladakh. 
(2) See Selig S Harrison, "Pakistan : the destabilisation game", Le Monde diplomatique English edition, October 2001. 
(3) Jyotindra Nath Dixit, Across Borders : 50 years of Indian Foreign Policy, Thomson Press India Ltd., New Delhi, 1998. 
(4) Statement to the Pakistani magazine Newsline, Karachi, February 2000.
</notes>
</article>