<article>
<titre>A PARTNER FOR THE FUTURE
Why Israel still needs Arafat </titre>
<auteur>Yossi Beilin
* Former Israeli minister of justice. Yossi Beilin was one of the people responsible for the secret Oslo talks, and is the author of several books including A Manual for a Wounded Dove, Yedioth Ahronoth Books, Tel Aviv, 2001 (see article by Amnon Kapeliouk), and Touching Peace : from the Oslo Accord to a Final Agreement, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, London, 1999</auteur>
<texte>
Yasser Arafat did not break with the Oslo peace accords, nor did he refuse Ehud Barak's famous "generous offer" at Camp David at least according to new books written by Israelis present at negotiations with Arafat (see 'Constructing catastrophe'). Many Israelis believe, after 25 years of national denial, that Arafat is still the only potential partner who can deliver peace.
Questions have been asked since the start of the second intifada in September 2000. Does Israel still have a partner for peace ? Was it right to recognise the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) in 1993 and accept Yasser Arafat's installation in the occupied territories in 1994 at the head of a Palestinian Authority (PA) that controls a police force of tens of thousands ?  
Many people think that the answer to both these questions is no - and not only those on the political right, who have never believed in the Oslo peace process, but those on the left, too. The foremost disbeliever is the former prime minister, Ehud Barak, who blames the Palestinians for his bruising electoral defeat in February 2001. Barak had made real efforts to reach an agreement on the Syrian and Palestinian tracks and he intended, should he win the elections, to resume negotiations with Arafat to continue the process agreed at the Camp David summit and built on by President Clinton's proposals in December 2000 and the Taba talks in January 2001. Then Barak decided that Arafat was no longer a partner. Barak's mind had been changed not by the outbreak of the second intifada nor the difficulties in the political negotiations, but his own rout in the elections.  
Barak has been transformed into the best voice for the right, and the worst problem for the peace camp. He was one of those responsible for the Labour Party's grave mistake of entering the government of Ariel Sharon. He even outdid Sharon, criticising him for sending his son and his foreign minister to see Arafat. Since Arafat was no longer a partner, declared Barak, there should be no contact with him of any sort.  
The Sharon government's decisions - that Arafat was not a proper negotiating partner and that the PA was a body that supported terrorism - resulted in the de facto imprisonment of Arafat in Ramallah and a refusal to let him leave, even for the Christmas celebrations in Bethlehem last year. The argument went that, since Arafat had taken no strategic decision to reach a peace agreement with Israel, it would be better to wait for a new Palestinian partner to emerge, or even hasten that process.  
Some foreign officials, mainly in the United States, quickly backed this, especially after the events of 11 September 2001. They too believed that Arafat and his regime were corrupt and linked to violence and acts of terror : so that it would be better for Israel to come to the "realistic" conclusion that it could not forge a peace deal with Arafat, and that it needed to find another partner.  
Israel will be making a terrible mistake if it adopts this approach. The decision that Arafat is not a real partner could bring disaster : it could remove all chance of peace and normal life for a long time to come, provoke a further deterioration of internal security, and worsen the economic stagnation that has already resulted from this crisis. Israel has tried for 26 years to find a peace partner who will control the West Bank and Gaza Strip. It has found one in Arafat and it would not be in Israel's interest to renounce him lightly.  
In search of a partner
King Hussein of Jordan was the natural choice to take possession of the West Bank after the war of June 1967, which he had waged against Israel and lost completely. The governments of Levi Eshkol, Golda Meir and Yitzhak Rabin proposed to the king an agreement based on the return of 70% of the West Bank. But he would only agree to a deal based on the Israeli forces' complete withdrawal from the territory. More than 20 years later, on 31 July 1988, he declared in a historic speech that he was renouncing all claims to the West Bank and that he agreed that the Palestinians should build their state there.  
During the 1978-79 negotiations on the future of Sinai with Egypt's president, Anwar Al-Sadat, the then head of government, Menahem Begin, proposed that the Gaza Strip be returned to Egypt. Sadat turned down this generous offer, declaring that he was leaving this territory to the Palestinians.  
Israel tried to find other negotiating partners. At the end of the 1960s and into the 1970s it still hoped that local Palestinian leaders from the West Bank would be ready to take on a national role. But these men, such as Sheikh Jaabri from Hebron, refused. At the start of the 1980s Sharon, then defence minister, tried to set up a pro-Israel Palestinian organisation called the Village Leagues, under Mustafa Dudin, in the villages of the occupied territories. It was a total failure, since no serious Palestinian element was prepared to consider the organisation representative of the Palestinians, and the plan quickly petered out.  
For the Madrid conference in 1991, Yitzhak Shamir's government insisted that the residents of the West Bank and Gaza be represented within a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation led by a Jordanian. Yet it was clear to everyone that these Palestinians were in close contact with the PLO leadership in Tunis and received orders from Arafat. The residents of the territories were not prepared to assume national responsibilities.  
We had to start the secret talks in Oslo in January 1993 finally to address representative Palestinians who were prepared to take responsibility for the West Bank and Gaza Strip and found the Palestinian people's state there, beside the state of Israel. The fact that we found a proper "address" on the Palestinian side and that we reached an agreement with this negotiating partner represents a big success for the Oslo process and has given us a real chance of ending the conflict.  
During the nine years since then both sides have made bad mistakes. No one is beyond reproach. The Oslo peace accord has not been completely respected by either side. Both Arafat's failure to stop the second intifada and Israel's exaggerated reaction to it have led us to a feeling of deadlock. The PA represents an important, interesting first stage in Palestinian state-building, but it also has serious problems and its errors of management need careful scrutiny. There are vital questions about relations between the PA and organisations linked to it, which use violence. These negative phenomena feed the demands of those in Israel who would rather make an arrangement with a different partner. But changing partners would be a dangerous and irresponsible decision.  
Arafat made a series of strategic choices from 1974 to the Oslo accords. It would be grotesque to imagine that he took the decision to recognise the state of Israel just to become the mayor of Gaza or Ramallah, constrained to ask for Israeli authorisation every time he wants to move. Arafat's decision allowed Israel to sign a peace treaty with Jordan in 1994, establish economic and political relations with most members of the Arab League, have diplomatic representation in the Gulf and North Africa, enlarge its diplomatic relations throughout the world and substantially improve its economy.  
What Arafat wants is to reach a permanent arrangement with Israel that allows him to become president of the Palestinian state, with Jerusalem as its capital. Arafat is a problematic leader. His past will not allow him to transform himself into Mahatma Ghandi or the Dalai Lama. But Sharon is hardly Mother Teresa, either. It would be easy to delete both from the political map and just wait for the next generation of leaders. But that would not maintain the status quo. It would lead to more violence, poverty and despair.  
In a few years Iran will have nuclear arms and a Middle East conflict could be an excuse to use them. And in a few years the majority of the Palestinians will be on the west of the Jordan River, and if the frontier between Israel and the Palestinian state is not fixed by then, Israel will find itself in an extremely complex situation.  
Both sides' need for a partner is vital. The two peoples are ready to make peace and pay the price. Neither of them can choose their neighbour nor their neighbour's leaders. In place of Arafat a leader could emerge from among the Islamists, who would not agree to negotiate with Israel, or a moderate leader who did not have Arafat's authority to reach a historic agreement and make the necessary concessions. So the only realistic option that the two sides have is to reach an agreement as soon as possible. 
</texte>
<notes>
</notes>
</article>