<article>
<titre>THREATS TO DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY
The new world disorder </titre>
<auteur>Pierre Conesa, Olivier Lepick
* Respectively senior servant and editor of the special edition of Revue international et stratégique on illicit international relations, Paris, September 2001 ; and research associate at the Fondation pour la recherche stratégique, author of Les armes biologiques, Que sais-je ?, Paris, 2001 
See Treaties and agreements : a check list. </auteur>
<texte>
United States threats to withdraw from peacekeeping in Bosnia if denied exemption from prosecution in the new International Criminal Court shows how far international security has been dismantled. The US now realises what it means to be a superpower and its strategists are formulating a doctrine to match, undermining all the agreements that governed world security and underpinned disarmament in the 1990s.
The major nuclear weapons treaties were drawn up on the basis of a balance of forces and mutually assured destruction. Having agreed on arms limitation, the United States and former Soviet Union moved towards cutting their arsenals. First there were the Salt (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks) agreements, then the Start (Strategic Arms Reduction Talks) agreements and the ABM (anti-ballistic missile) Treaty ensuring "nuclear peace" ; missile defence systems were limited to certain predetermined targets (see box).  
Those agreements have gradually been made meaningless. President George W Bush expressly denounced the ABM Treaty in spring this year. In May the number of warheads allowed to each side under the Start agreements was drastically revised. The missile defence programme, designed for a smaller number of vectors across the globe, will be more operational as a result ; and since it will probably involve Russia, it will maintain that country's status as a strategic partner of Washington.  
Congress has still not ratified the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) signed in 1995. The US government wants to keep all its options for developing new weapons open and reserves the right to conduct real tests, even though it has the ability to simulate them. Secondary treaties are also being weakened. The "cut off" talks on controlling exports of fissile material have been buried by US intransigence.  
Even the oldest of the international nuclear limitation agreements, the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), becomes difficult to read in the light of Bush's State of the Union address, delivered on 29 January this year, in which he accused the "axis of evil", Iraq, Iran and North Korea, of developing nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Although the first two signed the NPT, they are considered "bad proliferators" ; North Korea, which has withdrawn from the treaty, is seen as downright demonic. Pakistan, which has signed the NPT, does not come in for US criticism. It has recently become an ally and must be regarded as a "good proliferator" like India and Israel, which had the sense not to sign the treaty.  
In its war on terrorism Washington is being very selective in its definition of nuclear proliferation, depending on whether or not the countries in question are its allies. President Bush's dictum, "either you are with us or you are with the terrorists", means the NPT can be disregarded.  
The picture is no more encouraging when we look at the international agreements banning other weapons of mass destruction (biological or chemical). The US is one of the countries to have filed the legal instruments of the Biological Weapons Convention signed in 1972 - the first international treaty banning weapons of this kind. It has no system of verification, but five-yearly revision conferences have brought progress in that direction. At the 1991 meeting in Geneva, for example, groups of experts were set up to propose improvements ; this was an initiative by France and a number of other western countries  
Their 10 years of work came to nothing when, on 25 July 2000, the US Assistant Secretary of State for proliferation rejected all the new proposals on the grounds that they were contrary to US commercial and security interests (he meant the US programme for defence against biological weapons) and said they did not guarantee any slowing in the proliferation of such weapons. The arguments range from needing to protect national industry to such unlikely legal principles as fear of malicious prosecution of American citizens (fourth and fifth amendments to the constitution) (1).  
The US has accused Libya, Iran, North Korea, Sudan, Iraq and now Cuba of breaking the agreement. The anthrax scare following the 11 September attacks suggests that the Americans have pursued a biological weapons programme far beyond what defence against such threats requires (2).  
At least the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), signed in 1993, does have a system of verification. But the US did not ratify it until April 1997. And Congress introduced new provisions watering down what US negotiators had themselves insisted on (3). During the 1996 presidential campaign, the Republican candidate, Robert Dole, warned against "illusory" arms control deals and President Clinton postponed ratification until after the election.  
Finally, Congress introduced into the debate three provisions that greatly reduced the convention's scope : the president of the US could prevent any inspection deemed a threat to national security ; samples collected in the US could not leave national territory ; and the number industrial sites having to be declared to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which verifies compliance, was considerably reduced by comparison with the spirit of the convention.  
Although in May 2000 the US deposited the declaration all signatory countries were required to make, the first inspections in the US went badly. The OPCW inspectors saw many of their requests frustrated by red tape (4). The US, which had demanded transparency from proliferators acted like any suspect administration. So it is hardly surprising that Iraq, South Korea, Russia and Iran adopted, almost verbatim, US reservations about the CWC.  
Gentleman's agreement
This year the US forced the resignation of the Brazilian director-general of the OPCW, José Bustani, whom Washington considered incompetent (see article by Any Bourrier) ; the several weeks' crisis leading up to that undermined the OPCW even more. And the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) remains a gentleman's agreement ; Washington experts say 28 nations now have such technology. Moreover, since the US' grand national missile defence (NMD) programme met with opposition from many of its allies, the White House decided to extend the umbrella to its main partners, including Russia. That will probably be impossible without the transfer of sensitive technologies in violation of the MTCR.  
Finally, the former Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (Cocom), which was supposed to prevent technology exports to the USSR, has lost the teeth it once had. Now known as the Wassenaar Arrangement, it has been steadily extended to 33 countries, many of them outside of Nato. US negotiators often use it to prevent sales of non-sensitive technologies to "rogue states".  
Conventional weapons are equally worrying. For a variety of reasons, the US has not agreed to the International Convention on anti-personnel mines, which was signed in Ottawa in 1997 and came into force on 1 March 1999. These reasons include the protection of its forces along the demilitarised zone between the two Koreas and the desire to continue exporting combined anti-tank and anti-personnel mines. Here Washington is on the same side as China, which also exports mines.  
The Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons (5) has still not produced any results, It took place in New York in July last year under pressure from non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to stop the "slaughter of the poor". It is up against powerful US gun lobbies ; they invoke constitutional guarantees (fourth amendment on the right of US citizens to be secure in their persons). The US continues to reject any binding legal rule and any ban on transfers to non-state players so it can continue supporting pro-American guerrillas  
The White House and much of American public opinion have traditionally been suspicious of the United Nations Organisation. In 10 years the world has moved from the Gulf war to the war in Afghanistan. In the Gulf western forces were seen as upholding law and order, represented by the UN Security Council. But Washington started the war in Afghanistan, against a regime suspected of backing terrorist acts, without declaring war and without consulting the UN. President Bush's State of the Union address this January did not even mention the UN in connection with action against the "axis of evil".  
The UN will have to concentrate on conflicts that are of no interest to Washington like the Congo or Western Sahara. When it comes to international security, all we can now expect from it are texts with little binding force. Before 11 September the General Assembly had adopted more than 11 conventions against terrorism.  
Little by little, the international edifice built in an age of two superpowers, balanced forces and mutually assured destruction is crumbling. As the US says, the existing mechanisms for controlling proliferation have all been partly broken. The Pentagon believes that 12 states now have nuclear weapons, 16 have chemical weapons, 13 have biological weapons and 28 the missiles to deliver them. That is true ; what we dispute is what can be done about it. Washington accuses Iran, which has ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, of conducting a forbidden programme, but is delaying when it comes to seeking the inspections the convention allows (6).  
This dismantling did not begin with the present Republican administration. The difference between Bush and his predecessor lies more in the way he treats his main allies. They have in common the primacy of US interests. President Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, often says in her official speeches that the country's security must not depend on any external constraint.  
There was a similar period after the first world war, when the League of Nations was set up, advocated by President Woodrow Wilson but rejected by Congress. Then, US withdrawal from international security systems was justified by the dominant isolationism. Now, the chief player in the international order is clearly stating that it no longer wants to be bound by mandatory international instruments, a sentiment reinforced by 11 September.  
We are entering a period of great uncertainty. International security now depends on the unilateral stance of a superpower that has progressively shown a desire not to be bound by any international treaties or by international criminal law. This is evident from US refusal to recognise the International Criminal Court and from its creation of special courts to try the members of the al-Qaida network.  
President Bush is playing international policeman, choosing his next targets, not from among the countries linked to terrorism, which would have been the logical progression from the Afghanistan offensive, but from among the proliferating countries. They pose a different threat. Despite the Russian-US accord of 26 May on the number of nuclear warheads, we are seeing not the end of disarmament (7) but a new world disorder. 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) See Michael Moodie, "The BWC protocol : a critique", report of The Chemical and Biological Arms Control Institute (CBACI), Washington, June 2001 : see 
(2) Olivier Lepick, "Armes biologiques, le jeu trouble des Etats Unis", Libération, 7 February 2002 ; Susan Wright, "US : the bacteria option", Le Monde diplomatique, English edition, November 2001. 
(3) See speech by George Bush senior at the opening session of the Geneva conference, 13 April 1984. 
(4) Amy E Smithson, "US Implementation of the CWC" in Jonathan B Tucker, ed. : The Chemical Weapons Convention, Implementation, Challenges and Solutions, Monterey Institute of International Studies, 2001. 
(5) See Steve Wright, "A legal trade in death" and Philippe Rivière, "The problem of proliferation", Le Monde diplomatique English edition, January 2001. 
(6) Countries are supposed to get rid of their stocks of chemical weapons after 2007. But some, like Russia, lack the financial means to do so. 
(7) Pascal Boniface, "Vers la fin du désarmement", Libération, 22 April 2002.
</notes>
</article>