<article>
<titre>COLLATERAL DAMAGE FROM AN ILLEGAL WAR
Ottoman Empire : the division of the spoils </titre> 
<auteur>Henry Laurens
* Henry Laurens is a professor at the Paris-based Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales. His works include La Question de Palestine, vols 1 and 2 (Fayard, Paris, 2001 and 2002) 
Read also : What they said</auteur>
<texte>
The Ottoman Empire and its boundaries were the subject of intense negotiations between the French and the British between 1916 and 1922. After 1918 the United States asserted itself as mediator, acting on behalf of the rights to self-determination of the peoples of the empire. But those peoples were never consulted and territorial division was undermined.
THE Ottoman Empire's Arab provinces were under the collective influence of the European powers by 1914, and then were also influenced by the United States. The Young Turks, the reform-minded army officers who had seized power in 1908, wanted to end a century of constant foreign interference in Ottoman affairs. But freedom from that came at the high cost of an authoritarian centralisation that eventually produced an Arab independence movement seeking European support.  
France, with its economic investments and cultural and intellectual influence, was dominant in "natural" Syria. There was even talk of a "Levantine France" (now Lebanon, Syria and Israel). Britain, which had occupied Egypt since 1882, finally grudgingly recognised France's pre-eminence in this part of the region.  
The Ottomans entered the first world war in November 1914, wanting to rid the Middle East of foreign domination and block local Arab independence movements. In early 1915 Arab political elites became targets of Ottoman repression, which included hangings and exile in Anatolia (the Asian part of Turkey). Populations were martyred : the Christians of Mount Lebanon, an Ottoman administrative unit, were devastated by famine, the Armenians and the Anatolian Christians were deported or killed. Attempting to destabilise the two great imperial powers of France and Britain, the Ottomans called for jihad. The British forces initially took part in defensive combat near the Suez canal, while the Anglo- Indian army began its arduous conquest of Iraq, beginning with the Ottoman province of Basra (1).  
But jihad was a threat in French North Africa, as well as parts of sub-Saharan Africa and British India. Forced on to the defensive, France and Britain sought a new legal formula to re-establish their once dominant position. They initially considered using a decentralised Ottoman Empire as a de facto protectorate. In attacking the Dardanelles in 1915 to threaten Constantinople, the capital of the Ottoman Empire, France and Britain were forced to recognise Russia's claims to the city, which meant agreeing to carve up the region.  
Their bloody defeat in the Dardanelles and failure to control Gallipolli did not change their main goal. France and Britain later encouraged Sharif Hussein, the Emir of Mecca, to lead an uprising and create a fresh front against the Ottoman forces. Britain's high commissioner to Egypt, Sir Henry McMahon, wrote to Sharif Hussein urging him to rise up against Ottoman rule. Misunderstandings and translation errors complicated their ambiguous correspondence, leading to a long-lasting political mess.  
Romantic figures, especially TE Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia), hoped that an Arab renaissance, founded on Bedouin legitimacy, would supplant Ottoman rule and French influence in the Levant. It was thought that under the command of Hussein's sons, the princes of the Hashemite dynasty and the Bedouin nomadic Arab tribes would accept "benevolent" British rule. Britain even promised the Bedouins an independent Arabia - independent at least from Ottoman rule. The French in turn sought to extend the reach of Levantine France eastwards from the Mediterranean coast, creating a Greater Syria whose French-speaking inhabitants would be sympathetic to France and French rule.  
But how would the borders between British Arabia and French Syria be drawn ? France's Georges Picot and Britain's Mark Sykes negotiated over months, concluding in May 1916 with an exchange of letters between Paul Cambon, France's ambassador to Britain, and Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign secretary (2). France would directly administer the region from the Syrian coast to Anatolia. Palestine was placed under international control, meaning French/ British rule. The British were to administer Basra and a Palestinian enclave around Haifa. The independent Arab states given to the Hashemites would be under twin spheres of influence and administration, with the French in the north and the British in the south. The Sykes-Picot line, which split the Middle East in two, would enable the British to build a railway linking Baghdad and Haifa. Russia and Italy approved, though the Hashemites received only vague, confusing accounts of the French/British agreement.  
In early 1917 Britain began a difficult campaign in Palestine. In April the US entered the war against Germany as the associate, rather than the ally, of France and Britain. Because of the increasing mechanisation of war, France and Britain soon realised their dependence on oil. Indeed France, Britain and the US emerged victorious thanks to a tidal wave of oil.  
US President Woodrow Wilson did not feel at all bound by secret treaties signed by his British and French partners. He defended the right of self-determination, although it was unclear if this applied to non-white peoples, "brown" (Arabs) or "yellow". "Black" self-government was out of the question (3). Solidly backed by London, the British administration in Egypt challenged the terms of the agreement with France over Palestine, if not the rest of Syria. They copied Wilson's high-flown rhetoric and declared that, amid the ruins of the Ottoman Empire, Arabs, Kurds, Armenians and Jews would live peacefully together under British rule.  
     
Sykes used the Zionist movement to achieve this goal, leading to the Balfour Declaration of 2 November 1917, in which Britain called for the creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine (4). Britain's strategy was to occupy Palestinian lands and encourage the Arab revolt to expand to Syria, but not Palestine. British tactics included issuing a series of official declarations indicating support of the right to self-determination (which, in fact, meant only the right to choose British rule). When radical Arab nationalists rejected British supremacy, they were branded "Levantines", an ignominious reference also applied to pro-French, primarily Christian, elements.  
By 1918 oil was strategically paramount. The British/French agreement stipulated that France would control the Mosul region of northern Iraq, with its substantial potential oil reserves, although Britain was granted concession rights. To placate the colonial lobby, the French prime minister, Georges Clemenceau, ensured that French claims were limited to a "useful" Syria, not including the Holy Land but maintaining access to oil reserves. The French did not seek excessive territorial expansion since the high administrative costs would have outweighed oil revenues, so France abandoned its claims to a Greater Syria. After the armistice ended the first world war on 11 November 1918, Clemenceau met the British prime minister, David Lloyd George, to carve up the Middle East.  
In a journal entry dated 11 December 1920, Maurice Hankey, the British cabinet secretary, noted : "Clemenceau and Foch had come over [to London] after the armistice and were given a great military and public reception. Lloyd George and Clemenceau had driven to the French embassy. When they were alone Clemenceau said, 'Well, what are we to discuss ?' 'Mesopotamia and Palestine,' replied Lloyd George. 'Tell me what you want,' asked Clemenceau. 'I want Mosul,' said Lloyd George. 'You shall have it,' said Clemenceau. 'Anything else ?' 'I want Jerusalem too,' continued Lloyd George. 'You shall have it,' said Clemenceau, 'but Pichon will make difficulties about Mosul (5).' There was absolutely no record or memorandum made at the time. Nevertheless, and in spite of great pressure from his colleagues and from all kinds of interested parties, Clemenceau, who was always straight as a die, never went back on his word, and I am bound to say Lloyd George never gave him a chance. Thus and thus is history made !" (6).  
The French had already issued a proviso : under the terms of the agreement, access to Middle East oil would have to be shared ; two parallel sets of negotiations then took place. From the start of the Paris peace conference in January 1919, Wilson rejected the plans of France and Britain to annex Germany's former African and Pacific colonies, preferring to entrust the matter to the future League of Nations. Lloyd George cunningly proposed League of Nations "mandates", areas temporarily assigned to a civilised power responsible for leading them to independence. He discreetly included the Arab provinces of the defeated Ottoman Empire (known as "A" mandates). Wilson agreed in January 1919.  
The Middle Eastern states involved were not informed of these developments, though they were asked to appear before the supreme allied council, the Big Ten. Meanwhile Britain had intercepted a Lebanese delegation and prevented it from travelling to France. But Arab nationalists, pro-French elements from Syria, and Zionists did address the conference, even though they did not know the real rules of the game. Lloyd George allowed Britain's representatives to hammer things out with the French. The conflict came down to this : would there be a single mandate for the entire Middle East, which would certainly be British, or would there be two mandates, one French and one British ? The French held out for two.  
An exasperated Wilson called on France and Britain to establish a trilateral commission to determine which country the local populations would prefer as their mandatory power. Britain realised that Palestinian and Iraqi Arabs might reject their rule. France feared that the Syrians would be hostile to the prospect of French rule if they were forced to accept a Christian-majority Lebanese state. The two leading European powers withdrew from the commission, leaving the US as the sole arbiter.  
When the Palestinian Arabs rejected Zionism, the Lebanese Christians accepted French rule and the Syrian Arabs demanded independence, the US decided on 28 August 1919 that it should be the sole mandatory power. But it was too late : the US senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles on 19 November 1919, and the US subsequently withdrew from all allied conferences.  
French and British forces were now in open conflict. The balance of forces shifted in favour of France, which had increased its military strength even as Britain was demobilising. The proposal to divide the Middle East into two mandates was finally ratified. The conferences of Deauville in September 1919 and San Remo in April 1920 focused on redrawing the Sykes-Picot line ; Palestine's border was shifted a few kilometres northwards. Transjordan (now the West Bank and Jordan), initially meant as an air corridor to India, linked Palestine and Iraq. With railways seen as outmoded, a pipeline was constructed to transport Iraqi oil across Transjordan to Mediterranean ports. The French initially held 25% of the shares (later falling to 23.75%) in the consortium responsible for developing Iraqi oil.  
The final step was a decisive military showdown to impose British and French mandates. To subjugate local populations in Palestine, Syria and Iraq, France and Britain took part in operations that culminated in war. Dividing the Middle East into states was not an inherently evil idea. From the start the Hashemites thought partition favoured Sharif Hussein's eldest sons. But partition ran counter to the desires of local populations, while the use of military force proved that the lofty rhetoric of France and Britain was a lie. The last decade of Ottoman rule, during which leading figures were recruited and an electoral system, however imperfect, was established, had actually begun to provide some real political representation. French and British authoritarianism was a permanent step backwards.  
The territorial division lasted primarily because the ruling classes in the new capitals were able to impose their authority. But the events of 1919-1920 were seen as betrayals of previous commitments, especially the right to self-determination ; local elites were no longer masters of their own destiny. When they re-emerged as a political force, Arab nationalists refused to recognise the legitimacy of the artificial borders. Instead they called for a single unified state, which was meant to be a panacea for the region's ills. The new states were thought of as illegitimate and were thus weakened over the long term. The establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine in 1948 brought endless conflict in the entire Middle East.  
Occasionally the prospect of a new Sykes- Picot-type partition, imposed by foreign powers, is mentioned. Western assertions of moral superiority, supposedly based on democracy and liberalism, are thought of suspiciously and with disbelief, which is perhaps the most unfortunate consequence of the decisions of the Western powers between 1916 and 1920. Similar decision-making has, sadly, continued since. 
</texte>
<notes>
(1) The British in India intended to capitalise on Mesopotamia's immense agricultural potential to feed the world. See Charles Tripp, "Iraq : the imperial precedent", Le Monde diplomatique, English language edition, January 2003. 
(2) In 1919 the British used the term "Sykes-Picot accords" to devalue the treaty. 
(3) At the peace conference the US vigorously rejected Japanese claims about racial equality. 
(4) Besides challenging the French/British agreement, London was supposed to have sought the help of secret Jewish groups to shape the destiny of Russia and the US. 
(5) Stephen Pichon was France's foreign affairs minister. 
(6) See Stephen W Roskill, Hankey : Man of Secrets, vol II (1919-1931), Collins, London, 1972.
</notes>
</article>
